In this lecture, I'm just going to give a
couple
of basic notes on how to organize a data
analysis.
Of course, there's no universal way to do
this that would apply to every single
data analysis performed by anybody in the
world but I think there's some useful tips
that can be used to help you kind of put
things together to put things
in logical places and to, ultimately you
want to
ensure that your data analysis is
reproducible either
by yourself or by someone else.
So if we were to kind of boil down what
are the kind of key data analysis files
that you, you will probably retain and
over
the course of a major project of course
there's
going to be some data there's going to be
raw data and there's going to be
processed data uh,and you're probably
going to want
to save a lot of this in various places.
You'll probably generate some figures or
or tables for example and
they're going to be kind of exploratory
figures that
you just kind of put together to look at
the data to kind of produce this rough cut
of what the data analysis might look like.
These exploratory figures are not going to
be
very polished they're just going to,
they'll kind of be,
just good enough to kind of get you a
sense of what the data look like.
Then there might be some final figures
these final figures
are going to be useful for you to put in
reports,
they're going to, you're going to show
them to other people, they're
going to be well annotated and nicely
organized and put together.
Of course, there's going to be some code.
this, there might be some R code in the
form of both raw and unused scripts.
so, these are kind of things that you just
kind of code up
to see what's going on, maybe in the
process of making exploratory figures.
There;s going to be R code that you
eventually don't use in the end.
so, you'll have some scripts lying around.
There will be some final scripts that you
use in the final analysis.
And these will be a little bit, hopefully
easier to read, maybe some commented and
formatted better.
And then you might be running some R
markdown files that kind
of annotate a data analysis using a kind
of literate statistical analysis style.
And finally there's going to be some text
that you write either
in the form of readme files that explain
what's going on in
your project, there might be a more formal
report that you
have to write or even a paper that you
plan on publishing.
So all this text is going to kind of
integrate
everything that you've done in this data
analysis.
With the data, the figures, the tables,
and
the R code.
So the raw data will come in any number of
different forms.
They might come for example, as just
records.
Or as, or kind of formatted text, like you
have here.
And, and you're going to do something to
this raw
data to make it usable for an analysis
type of program.
So for example in this particular type of
data
you might do some text processing you
might try
to parse the data and if it's formatted in
a special format and so that you can
generate
something that can be later used for
modeling or other types of analysis.
So you want to store this raw data in
your,
in your analysis folder if you're working
on a project.
And if the data were accessed from the web
you want to include things like
the URL, where you got the data what the
data set is, and kind of
brief description of what it's for the
date that you accessed the, the URL
on, on the website and you might want to
this in, in like a
readme file just so, so when you look at
it later or if someone else
looks at it they know kind of where this
data came from and what it's for.
Another thing that I like to do if you're
using GIT or, or equivalent version
control system to
track things that are going on in your
project
you can add your data set, your raw data.
If it's possible, if it's too big then
it's not really feasible.
But you can add your raw data to the
repository.
And in the
log file, sorry, in the log message and
when you add it you can
talk about, you know, where the, what the
website was when you got it.
And what the URL, URL was et cetera.
And so that's sometimes a convenient place
to put this kind of information.
Processed data usually is a little bit, is
cleaner than the raw data.
It can come in a variety of forms.
One possibility is, is as a table.
So here you can see there this is a kind
of classic data table.
With rows and columns.
You should process data should be named so
that you can,
easy to see, you, you can name the file so
it's easy
to see kind of what's script generated
what data and so the processing
script is very important because it shows
you how the raw data
were mapped to the process data.
And so, in any readme file or any
sort of documentation it's, it's important
to, to document
you know, what files, what code files were
used
to transform the raw data into the
processed data.
And finally the processed data should be
tidy so that you
can use them in subsequent modeling or
analysis types of functions.
Exploratory figures are usually very
simple figures,
these are figures that you kind of make
in the course of your analysis as you're
kind of getting a look at the data.
Typically your data will be high
dimensional and because you'll be
collecting lots of variables on lots of
subjects or, or observations.
And so you're going, going to be able to
look at pieces of the data at a time.
And so exploratory figures serve the role
of kind of giving you a,
a quick look at various kind of aspects of
your data, of various cuts.
And so they're not all necessarily
going to be
part of your final report or final paper.
And so you kind of, you kind of, and you,
and you'll tend,
so you'll tend to make a bunch of these
all in the way.
They don't need to be pretty, but they
need to be usable
enough so that you understand kind of
what's going on in the figure.
And, and, and how to reproduce it.
Final figures will generally be much more
polished
they'll be, they'll be better organized
and better,
kind of much more readable so here you see
is a figure that's a four panel plot.
It's not a single panel so cramming in a
lot more data into this type of four panel
plot.
and, and the final figures usually make a
very small
subset of the set of exploratory figures
that you might generate.
So for example, the typical paper in a, in
a journal or something like that
might have four or maybe five figures in
it
because these figures take up a lot of
space.
You typically don't want to inundate
people with a
lot of figures because then this kind of
ultimate message
of what you're trying to communicate will
will tend to
get lost in, in this kind of pile of
figures.
And so it's important to have these
figures that are kind of
labeled well and annotated so people
understand what's going on with the data.
As you're doing a data analysis you'll
probably
burn through a lot of different R scripts.
Code files for various purposes.
They'll be a lot of dead ends, kind of
that
you'll go down and maybe they won't be
that useful.
So there'll be a lot of R scripts that
kind of
don't play into the final analysis and so
these R
scripts are going to be kind of less
commented and maybe
just kind of code that kind of puts some
stuff together.
You may have multiple versions of these
code files.
and,
and typically, will include, include
analyses that are later discarded.
Final scripts will be much more clearly
commented.
You'll have maybe bigger comment blocks
for whole sections of code.
So there'd be lots of small comments kind
of explaining what's going on.
Any processing details that any code
that's used to
process the raw data would be important to
include.
and, and basically these final scripts you
want to clean up so they,
they for any analysis that would appear in
a final write up of paper.
And so it's important, well,
when people see a final a product like a
paper or a
report that they understand, you know,
what scripts went into this report.
and, and, and what processing and kind of
analysis scripts that might have gone into
this.
So they know that they can see the kind of
chain of events that occurred.
It's important, of course, to keep a lot
of the
other stuff that was not used in the final
report
just in case someone may want to look at
some
of the, some of the dead ends that he went
down.
But that can be placed in a separate part
of the project directory.
R markdown files are also, are also very
useful.
They may not be exactly required.
But they can be very useful to kind of
summarize parts of analysis.
Or an entire analysis itself.
R markdown files you can use to generate
reproducible reports.
Because you can embed code and text into
the same document and then
you process the document into something
readable like a webpage or a PDF file.
These are very easy to create in Rstudio
and they can be useful as a kind
of intermediate step either perhap, you
know, be kind of something in between just
kind of code scripts code files and data
and, and a polished final report.
Readme files are really useful because
they kind of
explain what is going on inside your
project directory.
If you use R markdown you may not need
them because, the
markdown file will typically document
what's going on in a given file.
That's the idea behind literate
programming or literate statistical
analysis is that you don't separate the
document and the
code and the data in separate little
pieces rather
you try to integrate them all into a
single file.
However if you don't use R mark down files
you may
want to have readme files that explain
what's going on so you can see kind of, so
that, that you or another person can get a
sense of the organization of the project.
But they could contain you know step by
step instructions for how
the analysis is conducted, what code files
are called first, what are
used to process the data, what are used to
fit models, and
what are used to kind of generate figures
and things like that.
so, readme files are really useful for
explaining kind of what's going on.
Finally in the end you'll probably produce
some document or report,
maybe a paper or summary of all of the
analysis that
you did and kind of the, and the point of
this
is to tell the final story of what you
generated here.
And, and typically you'll have a title, an
introduction that kind of
motivates your problem the methods that
you used the refine, the results
and any measures of uncertainty, and then
any conclusions that you might
draw from the data analysis that you did,
including any pitfalls or
potential problems.
The important thing is that you need to
tell a coherent
story, and so you need to do, all, take
all the
analysis that you did and kind of winnow
it down into
a final product that has a, a coherent
story to it.
You definitely should not include every
analysis that you
performed through the whole process, so
there many, may
be many analysis that you did but you want
to kind of narrow it down to the important
parts.
That does not mean you need to delete
everything
that you've ever did but the summary
report should not include everything.
And you should always include some
references for
the statistical methods that you use, so
that way
people that know kind of what you used,
maybe what software you used, what
implementation was used.
And so this is very important for again
for reproducibility by others.
So, that's a quick overview of how to,
kind of
organize your data analysis, [COUGH] just
some basic tips because
every data analysis will have its specific
details, just a
couple pointers here to things that you
may be interested in.
First is a, kind of a case, a set of
links, on a kind of case, study of a
non-reproducable study, involving cancer,
cancer data and analysis.
And so we have a link
to that.
There's an editorial in the journal
Biostatistics about the reproducible
research policy.
So you can take a look at that.
And a couple of links to managing
statistical analyses and some,
some kind of projects guidelines and best
practices from other people.
And then, of course, there's a, there's a
software
package called Project Template, which is
a, actually an R
package, that can be used to automate a
lot of
the kind of mundane aspects of a data
analysis project.
So I encourage you to take a look at that
too.